---
title: "Perspective"
order: 4
---

We believe that the biggest message to take from this investigation is that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to bacterial species indentification in metagenome samples.  There are several reasons for this.  There is no consistently applied definition for the boundary that divides bacterial species based on DNA sequence identity.  While the rule of thumb is that at approximately > 95% average sequence identity, strains fall into different species, the main chromsomes of some species (like *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis*) can be >99% similar to each other in terms of DNA sequence identity.  Secondly, some species distinctions rely on the presence or absence of mobile elements like plasmids and phages (again *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* are a great example), which are hard to model using a uniform approach like Kraken or Metaphlan. These genetic elements are often modular in structure with very similar 'backbones' but with key genes inserted or deleted.  Additionally, the generalist species indentification programs rely on databases of sequenced genomes, which are not uniform in their coverage of different species, or different lineages within species.

Individual species have unique features that can be used to extract information from metagenomic sequence. In this case, if you were to have an organism-specific detection algorthim for *B. cereus* you would need to account for the presence of the plasmids with at least 2 times the coverage of the chromsome.  You would also expect eveness of coverage across reads mapped to a pXO1 reference to be a strong indication for the presence of *B. anthracis*.

Even if you have developed a sophisticated algorithm you will still need to use judgement in interpreting results.  In the case of the *B. cereus* group, we dont know what proportion of the DNA came from spores and what proportion was in the more fragile vegative state and how this might vary in other environments. There is also still much that we dont know about bacteria in the environment, especialy the conditions under which they exchange DNA.  Can we say that its not natural to find evidence of a small number of "anthracis specific" SNPs on a *B. cereus* chromsome?  This could be a rare, as yet unsequenced lineage, or because of recent recombination, or even convergent evolution. Judgement is especially important where the amount of data supporting a putative pathogen is small. Obviously orthologous validation (culture, PCR etc) is desirable if the sample is available.

Finally, when searching for pathogens, negative results should be also treated carefully.  The limit of detection for a pathogen will be affected by the amount of DNA sequence generated and the complexity of the microbial community.
